---
title: "Mastodon and the Indie Web: rediscovering ownership in social networks"
layout: post
summary: "With the recent news of Elon Musk buying Twitter for obscene amounts, some thoughts on what is out there to
build online communities in spaces designed with people prioritised, and ungoverned by billionaires and corporations."
---

[Elon Musk recently purchased Twitter for $44bn](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2022/apr/25/twitter-elon-musk-buy-takeover-deal-tesla). I suppose if you're made of cash, you can probably find a few reasons that make this a worthwhile buy. You've got the
reputation laundering (Musk has contextualised his purchase as a move for "freedom"; we'll see what that actually means)
, the power of having control over a social network that has profoundly shaped the way we communicate online, the
intellectual property, and the social data of over 200 million users.

Twitter is a treasure trove for data-hungry billionaires, so this takeover shouldn't come as a huge surprise. The
internet has become a playground for billionaires and corporations over the years; their presence and influence are now
as much a fabric of the internet as HTTP.

The original premise of the internet being a collaborative space for sharing information may persist - we all certainly
share far more now than we perhaps would have even 15 years ago - but it's been tainted by the knowledge that powerful
tech companies are using the data we share to further their own financial objectives.

We've gained so much out of the internet that we have come to accept these more nefarious aspects as part and parcel of
participating in online spaces. Convenience has come at a price to our security and data. But despite the hectoring
presence of big tech and powerful billionaires, there are principles and ideals that are trying to stand strong in an
ever-growing digital space hounded by profit motive and corporate capitalism.

## Mastodon - federated social networking

Mastodon recently got a lot of press upon the news of Musk's takeover; understandable as this is a platform that takes a
lot of cues from microblogging services such as Twitter; you might have "toots" instead of "tweets", 500 characters
instead of 280, but the underlying premise is still the same. The difference, however, is that Mastodon is free and
open-source software (FOSS) that allows anyone to self-host their own social network.

You have individual instances of Mastodon that run on different servers, with different owners, moderators and codes of
conduct. [There are quite a number of them](https://github.com/McKael/mastodon-documentation/blob/master/Using-Mastodon/List-of-Mastodon-instances.md)
, too, ranging from [general-purpose servers](https://mastodon.social/) all the way through
to [special interest](https://kith.kitchen/about) groups. When you join one of these communities, you'll get access to a
feed of all the users within that instance.

The strength of Mastodon, however, is in its interoperability. Even though you sign up to a specific instance, users on
one instance can communicate with others on another because Mastodon is built on
the [ActivityPub protocol](https://activitypub.rocks/). Essentially, this means you get three feeds: "toots" from people
you follow, "toots" from people within your Mastodon instance, and finally "toots" from all federated instances (this
broader universe is known as the [Fediverse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fediverse)).

The end result is a series of decentralised, interoperable social networks. No individual owns entire swathes of user
data, nor are online communities beholden to the whims of shareholders and the profit motive.

There is still ownership via those who run the communities and servers, of course, but the scale is much smaller. The
people within a Mastodon instance have much more power in this context. Mastodon gives you the ability to migrate your
account from one instance to another, and bring your data and followers with you. You're not tightly coupled to any
specific platform or space; you have freedom in ways a centralised, megalithic social network could never give you.

## Owning your data - the Indie Web Movement

While a core principle of the Fediverse is to remove the link between user, our data, and profit-focused organisations,
the Indie Web movement advances this a step further and encourages people to take ownership of their social data on
their own domain. Indie Web entirely severs the link between corporations and individuals.

The Indie Web isn't a tool itself, but a set of principles to guide how we may curate a digital presence in an online
space we own ourselves. It values open source software, tech agnosticism and fundamental web standards such
as [h-entry](https://microformats.org/wiki/h-entry) and [Micropub](https://micropub.spec.indieweb.org/). By embracing
these ideas, the Indie Web principles encourage us not to become tightly coupled to any proprietary technologies.

These tools allow people to share things on their own domain and syndicate it to various social networking platforms and
feeds, if they wish to. However, there is a higher barrier to entry as it requires some proficiency in web development -
although there are [tools](https://sitejs.org/) being built to aid people who aren't comfortable with coding.

## Looking to the future - another way is possible

What both the Indie Web movement and Mastodon show is that there is another way of social networking that focuses on
people rather than social data commodification.

However, this paradigm is inherently more technical with a higher barrier to entry; discoverability requires more manual
work as there aren't any algorithms suggesting "things you may be interested in" based on our data - as we would expect;
and the overall "reach" is still miniscule in comparison to the hundreds of millions you can find on Twitter right now.

But with Musk's Twitter buyout reiterating just how much our social data and online identity is at the whims of
billionaires, the Fediverse and Indie Web principles feel all the more significant. Imperfect as the modern internet may
be, we can dream that something better will become the norm; an online space that's focused on people, where websites
don't track you or crunch your social data to feed its algorithms. It's important that we continue to build and grow
these alternative systems, lowering the barrier to entry so more people can feel comfortable participating within them.